
At a top level, a computer consists of:
1. CPU (central processing unit)
2. memory
3. I/O components

with one or more modules of each type. These components are interconnected in some fashion to achieve the **basic function of the computer, which is to execute programs.** Thus, at a top level, we can characterize a computer system by describing:
1. the external behavior of each component, that is, the data and control signals that it exchanges with other components.
2. the interconnection structure and the controls required to manage the use of the interconnection structure.


Now consider this alternative. Suppose we construct a **general-purpose configuration of arithmetic and logic functions.** This set of hardware will perform various functions on data **depending on control signals applied to the hardware.**

In the original case of customized hardware, the system accepts data and produces results (Figure 3.1a). With general-purpose hardware, the system **accepts data and control signals and produces results.** Thus, instead of rewiring the hardware for each new program, the programmer merely needs to supply a **new set of control signals.** How shall control signals be supplied? The answer is simple but subtle. The entire program is actually a sequence of steps. At each step, some arithmetic or logical operation is performed on some data. For each step, a new set of control signals is needed. Let us provide a unique code for each possible set of control signals, and let us add to the general-purpose hardware a segment that can accept a code and generate control signals.

## Basic instruction cycle 

In its simplest form, instruction processing consists of two steps:
1. The processor reads (fetches) instructions from memory one at a time.
2. Executes each instruction. 

 **Program execution** : consists of **repeating** the process of instruction **fetch** and instruction **execution**. 

The instruction execution may involve several operations and depends on the **nature** of the **instruction**.

**Instruction cycle:** The processing required for a single instruction.

Using the simplified two-step description given previously, The two steps are referred to as the **fetch cycle** and the **execute cycle.**

Program execution **halts** only if:
1. the machine is turned off
2. some sort of unrecoverable error occurs
3.  Program instruction that halts the computer is encountered.

## Action categories:

In general, these actions fall into four categories:

- Processor-memory: Data may be transferred from processor to memory or from memory to processor.

- Processor-I/O: Data may be transferred to or from a peripheral device by transferring between the processor and an I/O module.

- Data processing: The processor may perform some arithmetic or logic operation on data.

- Control: An instruction may specify that the sequence of execution be altered.

For example, the processor may fetch an instruction from location 149, which specifies that the next instruction be from location 182. The processor will remember this fact by setting the program counter to 182. Thus, on the next fetch cycle, the instruction will be fetched from location 182 rather than 150.

An instruction's execution may involve a combination of these actions.


## Classes of interrupt

##### Program:
Generated by some condition that occurs as a result of an instruction execution, such as arithmetic overflow, division by zero, attempt to execute an illegal machine instruction, or reference outside a user's allowed memory space.

##### Timer:
Generated by a timer within the processor. This allows the operating system to perform certain functions on a regular basis.

##### I/O:
Generated by an I/O controller, to signal normal completion of an operation, request service from the processor, or to signal a variety of error conditions.

##### Hardware failure:
Generated by a failure such as power failure or memory parity error.

Virtually all computers provide a mechanism by which other modules (I/O, memory) may interrupt the normal processing of the processor. we need to introduce the concept now to understand more clearly the nature of the instruction cycle and the implications of interrupts on the interconnection structure.

From the point of view of the user program, an interrupt is just that: 
an interruption of the normal sequence of execution. **When the interrupt processing is completed, execution resumes** Thus, the user program **does not have to contain any special code** to accommodate interrupts; the **processor and the operating system** are **responsible for suspending the user program and then resuming it at the same point.**



# Bus

A bus is a **communication pathway connecting two or more devices. A key characteristic of a bus is that it is a shared transmission medium.** Multiple devices connect to the bus, and a signal transmitted by any one device is available for reception by all other devices attached to the bus. If two devices transmit during the same time period, their signals will overlap and become garbled. Thus, only one device at a time can successfully transmit.

Typically, a bus consists of multiple communication pathways, or lines. Each line is capable of transmitting signals representing binary 1 and binary 0. Over time, a sequence of binary digits can be transmitted across a single line. Taken together, several lines of a bus can be used to **transmit binary digits simultaneously (in parallel).** For example, an 8-bit unit of data can be transmitted over eight bus lines.

Computer systems contain a number of different buses that provide pathways between components at various levels of the computer system hierarchy. A bus that connects major computer components (processor, memory, I/O) is called a system bus. The most common computer interconnection structures are based on


### System bus

A system bus consists, typically, of from about **fifty to hundreds of separate lines**.
The **data lines** **provide a path for moving data among system modules**. These lines, collectively, are called the data bus. The data bus may consist of 32, 64, 128, or even more separate lines, the number of lines being referred to as the width of the data bus. Because each line can carry only 1 bit at a time, the number of lines determines how many bits can be transferred at a time. **The width of the data bus** is a key factor in determining overall system performance. For example, if the data bus is 32 bits wide and each instruction is 64 bits long, then the processor must access the memory module twice during each instruction cycle.


### Data bus and address bus

The **address lines are used to designate the source or destination of the data on the data bus.** For example, if the processor wishes to read a word (8, 16, or 32 bits) of data from memory, it puts the address of the desired word on the address lines.

Clearly, the width of the **address bus determines the maximum possible memory capacity of the system.** Furthermore, the address lines are generally also used to **address I/O ports.** Typically, the **higher-order bits are used to select a particular module on the bus**, and the **lower-order bits select a memory location or I/O port within the module**. For example, on an 8-bit address bus, address 01111111 and below might reference locations in a memory module (module 0) with 128 words of memory, and address 10000000 and above refer to devices attached to an I/O module (module 1).

### Control lines
The control lines are used to **control the access to** and **the use of the data and address line**s. Because the **data and address lines are shared by all components**, there must be a means of controlling their use. Control signals transmit both command and timing information among system modules.

**Timing signals** indicate the **validity of data and address information.**

**Command signals** specify **operations to be performed.** Typical control lines include:

- Memory write: causes data on the bus to be written into the addressed location

- Memory read: causes data from the addressed location to be placed on the bus

- I/O write: causes data on the bus to be output to the addressed I/O port

- I/O read: causes data from the addressed I/O port to be placed on the bus

- Transfer ACK: indicates that data have been accepted from or placed on the bus

- *Bus request*: indicates that a module needs to gain control of the bus

- Bus grant: indicates that a requesting module has been granted control of the bus

- Interrupt request: indicates that an interrupt is pending

- Interrupt ACK: acknowledges that the pending interrupt has been recognized

 - Clock: is used to synchronize operations